Summary as of 2021:
Enthusiastic Air Force veteran transitioning into the IT industry with more than 5 years of managing
dynamic collaborative environments and an unquenchable drive to learn new skills. Vertically integrated
experience in development and operational roles as a rapid prototyping startup founder. Excited to embrace
new opportunities as a software engineer for an innovative software company.
Education
Cloud Application Developer - Certification 2021
Microsoft Software and Systems Academy - Embry Riddle
Construction Technology - Associates of Applied Science 2020
Community College of the Air Force
Certifications
Java SE 11 Developer (Oracle) | Azure Developer (Microsoft) | Software Development Fundamentals (Microsoft)
Languages Tools
C# • C++• Java • SQL • HTML/CSS/JS | Azure • Visual Studio/Code • ASP.Net • Eclipse • Github • WordPress
Soft Skills
Agile Methodologies • DevOps Principles • Scrum Framework • Gantt Charts • Kanban Boards
Fluent in French • Fluent in Chinese • Supportive Leadership • Resource Management • Versatile Adaptability
Career History
Software Engineering Student Dec 2020 - May 2021
Microsoft Software and Systems Academy (MSSA)
MSSA is an advanced 19-week technical training course developed by Microsoft teamed with Embry Riddle
Aeronautical University. The program leverages college accredited courses with the goal of preparing transitioning
service members for technical opportunities at Microsoft and their Enterprise Partners. Passed AZ-204, AZ-900, and
MTA-98-361.
• Studied the software development lifecycle and how to use it to successfully develop various
console-based and graphical applications using C# and Microsoft Visual Studio.
• Learned how to use SQL for CRUD operations to databases using MS SQL Server.
• Completed 360 live classroom hours mastering fundamentals of C#, T-SQL, ASP.Net MVC, and Azure.
• Used ASP.Net MVC as well as HTML and CSS to create multiple web-based applications and projects.
• Enhanced collaborative skills working in groups to complete multiple software development projects.
Structural Engineer May 2017 - Dec. 2020
US Air Force
The Structural shop maintained all real property on Nellis Air Force Base. The broad field of work requiredversatility
and adaptability. Trained for sheet metal fabrication, welding, carpentry, masonry, locksmithing, roofing, flooring,
finish work and rotated quarterly between shops to maintain competency. Mentored junior airmen to achieve technical
competency as well as personal development in a new city far from home.
• Senior Airman - Led independent crews of three airmento complete work orders on base. Optimized
workflow and increased efficiency in my team. Prioritized work according to impact and resource
availability. Delegated work based on team member’s proficiencies and expertise.
• Standby Duty - 1 week standby rotations every 8 weeks, available 24/7 within an hour of call, addressed
crisis events where perimeters were breached, orchestrated emergency response.
• Dedication - roofing for 6 hours a day in the Vegas 115 degree summer heat is a testament of diligence
• Legacy - Designed and led crew to paint a 15 foot mural at the Lackland basic training lecture halls.
Designed the 99th Civil Engineering Squadron coin, an enduring tradition in the military.
• Honor Guard - Conducted 27 military funeral ceremonies with firing party and pallbearers.
• Color Guard - Conducted 8 high profile processions at major events in Las Vegas.
Wedding Photographer Feb. 2016 - Feb. 2017
Agaba Studios, Houston, TX
Consulted with couples, captured priceless memories through the course of their weddings, communicatedeffectively
with various customers, directed large groups around venues, committed to customer service and satisfaction.
• 12 weddings and 15 engagement sessions through the course of career.
• Independent work: landscape photography, independent portrait photographer, senior pictures.
Co-Founder, Chief Technology Officer Dec. 2013 - Oct. 2015
Krate Technologies LLC
Krate Technologies LLC was a start-up 3D printing, CAD, and fabrication firm aimed to fill a local, low cost need for
rapid turnaround prototyping, design iterating and embedded systems solutions with Arduino IDE. 4 total employees
worked at Maker's Cafe at peak operation. Startup work environment was by nature Agile and the dev team
intrinsically integrated operations with short feedback cycles directly with the client, resulting in rapid iterations.
• Envisioned the business roadmap and led the technical team in developing solutions.
• Orchestrated workflows and managed projects from defining requirements through review.
• B2B and B2C business, the small scale of the business allowed us to be agile enough for both.
• Built servo and motor driven 3D printed full IronMan armor for a private individual.
• Built a 3D Scanner for UT graduate research at the Blanton Museum.
• Printed architectural models for Matt Fajkus Architecture.
• Technical expert, learning on the job daily and adapting to different problems. Worked around the clock,
with no set schedule, fueled by caffeine and passion.
Volunteer Experience
Habitat for Humanity - Helped build 2br home for a family in need in Round Rock, TX
Humane Society - bi-weekly volunteer for the local shelter in Gulfport, MS
Southern Nevada Climbing Coalition - Helped clean up graffiti at Red Rocks in Las Vegas