2020 - Backpacking Guide

Few things are as empowering as a backpacking trip. Hauling your home on your back like a tortoise, you traverse varying landscapes and savor the journey instead of the destination. Whether you’re planning on a short weekend getaway or a vast soul-searching journey, this guide will help you prepare for your backpacking adventure.

This guide is divided into 5 sections:
•	General advice
•	General gear check
•	Seasonal and specialized gear
•	Useful resources
•	Shopping list w/ links

General Advice

My advice is to travel with a smartphone device for navigation, entertainment (music), and communication purposes. Here are a few helpful apps you should install on your phone. Remember to keep your phone on airplane mode if you don’t need cellular data, it’ll elongate your battery life significantly. GPS still works on airplane mode.
•	Gaia GPS: You can use this app offline! Download maps to your phone and you can navigate through your phone’s GPS, which works virtually anywhere regardless of if you’re getting cellular signal, as long as you can see the sky. Additionally, you can view many hike routes that other users uploaded or map your own routes on a variety of topographical maps (imperial and metric scales).
•	Wunderground: The most well-rounded, all encompassing weather app IMO. Full of features and customizations to suit your individual needs. Includes a map with highly localized data.
•	StarWalk 2: Odds are you’re going to traverse some remote landscapes with low light pollution. Take advantage of this opportunity to stargaze! This app makes it a breeze to find constellation and learn about celestial objects.
•	Hostelworld (sadly not very good in the USA) or Hotels.com: Sick of sleeping outside? Want to take a warm shower? Book beds/rooms for cheap on the go with these apps.
•	Yelp: Sick of eating freeze dried food? Get insight from the locals on the best places to eat!
•	Google Maps: Just generally useful, I don’t need to elaborate on that.
•	PhotoPills: This is the ultimate toolkit for any landscape photographer. It includes tools for astrophotography, sunrise and sunset, timelapse calculator, a map showing relative direction of the moon and sun, and much more!
Don’t play games or read books on your phone, it will drain the battery at a rate you may not be able to charge on longer hikes.

Develop your cardio, endurance, and leg strength: you’re not running a marathon, but you’re going to end up hauling around 35 pounds for dozens to hundreds of miles. It’s not going to be a cakewalk; in fact it’s going to be at times very tortuous. So train appropriately.
Build an itinerary to have a frame of reference for travel times, milestones, and possible campsites.
Research minimum temperatures and dress/pack appropriately. It’s hard to fall asleep if you’re too cold.
Try different backpacking food brands to find your preferred one. Good food= good morale.
Familiarize yourself with your gear and test everything before departure. Set up camp in your backyard.
Have fantastic last few meals before your departure. Carb up, you’re going to need the reserve of energy.



Gear List: nvest in minimal-weight gear. Every ounce counts on a long hike, so don’t carry unnecessary bulk. Expect to spend from 800 to 2000 for gear if you’re starting from scratch. Price ranges for gear vary greatly, but generally the more expensive, the more reliable and lightweight. 
Essential Gear:
	50-65L backpack: If you’re packing more than that, you’re doing something wrong.
	Pair of trekking poles: A knee-saver. Telescopic variety can be used for shelter support
	Hydration bladder: Size varies by climate and availability of water.
	Water purification system: pump variety recommended; they can tap into shallow sources.
	Integrated stove system: Invest in an integrated system; it saves fuel and weight.
	Isobutane fuel: select appropriate size for duration of trip.
	Bowl and spork: titanium is the best, stay away from cheap plastic.
	Freeze-Dried food: I recommend the individually packaged variety you can cook in packaging.
	Snacks: Cliff bars are awesome. Trail mix is an obvious choice. Don’t over-pack.
	Trowel: gotta dig catholes for number 2
	2 Waterproof fire-starting devices: Lighters, matches, magnesium sparker, etc.
	Power bank Depends: capacity depends on power consumption and devices.
	Water resistant headlamp with extra batteries: frees up hands at night.
	Full down sleeping bag: I know it’s really expensive, but the volume and weight savings make it a no-brainer. Select for appropriate temperature.
	Sleeping pad: Inflatable is lighter and smaller than foam.
	Ultralight tent: trekking pole supported variety recommended to save weight.
	Ultralight Stakes + an extra: they break, so bring an extra.
	First Aid kit: antibiotics, disinfectant, bandages, tiny roll of duct tape
	Smartphone with appropriate apps.
	Trash Bags: large zip-lock is better because it helps contain the scents.
	Minimalist Toiletries, small synthetic towel, biodegradable cleaning wipes, toilet paper.
	Sunscreen and Sunglasses: because the sun will hurt you.
	Small length of rope: hang your pack to keep it clean and away from creatures at night.
Optional Gear:
	15-21W Solar Panel: Depends on usage and devices. Not necessary for weekend hikes
	Secondary water storage: bladders may break.
	Kammok Wallaby or Eno Sub 7 hammock: at 10 and 7 ounces, respectively, they are the lightest and best hammocks. Quick set up and extremely comfortable.
	Eno Helios hammock strap: don’t use ropes, for the sake of the trees. These are the lightest adjustable hammock straps on the market.
	Rain-fly shelter (if your tent doesn’t have a detached rainfly): So you don’t need to set up your tent if it rains during the day. Also nice for shelter from the sun and for the hammock.
	Sony RX100: simply the best camera for its weight. Nothing comes even close.
	Ultrapod Tripod: for long exposure photography, selfies, and timelapses.
	GPS Watch with map function and altimeter: Never get lost. More reliable than your smartphone. Don’t forget to pack the charging cable as well!
	Sturdy knife with partial serrated edge: you never know when you may need one.
	A good book or kindle: There aren’t many pleasures in the better than reading a book in the wild
	Packable inflatable pillow
	French Press: Snow Peak makes a titanium model: works with tea and coffee.
	LED Lantern: secondary light source is always a good idea, and lanterns are nice at campsites.
	UCO candle lantern: plenty bright in the wild and always improves the atmosphere.
	Ultralight “sink”: they weigh next to nothing and come in handy
	Ultralight daypack: for those side adventures!
Seasonal and Specialized Gear


Winter:
•	Down coat
•	Waterproof shell
•	Wool socks
•	Insulated sleeping pad
•	Underquilt for hammock backpacking
•	Larger fuel canister because you may need to melt snow.
•	Down blanket

Rain:
•	Waterproof shell for backpack
•	Waterproof shell for you
•	Extra socks
•	Extra underwear
