Personality
Report
Understanding Your Personality and
Teamwork Experiences
Report Prepared For:
Individual and Team Performance Lab
Department of Psychology
The University of Calgary
David Chui
August 25, 2023
OVERVIEW
PERSONALITY
This personality report provides your scores on the “Big Five” factors of personality (i.e., traits) based
on your survey responses. The goal is to help you become better acquainted with yourself and your
team members.
Big Five involve Extraversion, Emotionality, Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, and Openness (exact
labels vary by theorist). 

Activity Level: You enjoy being busy and tend to manage multiple activities and tasks at a time. Capitalize on your ability to
react quickly to changing requirements but be careful of taking on too many tasks or being too ambitious within a team project.
Your team members should all equally contribute.
Assertiveness: You sometimes like to take the lead in a group setting, but are also comfortable allowing others to take charge
in a team. Be aware of times when you should speak your mind or take the lead but also be mindful of situations where you
should take a step back and let others contribute.
Cheerfulness: You tend to be joyful and optimistic, but also know when to be serious about accomplishing the team's work.
Continue to adapt your behavior to best suit the situation, whether that means sharing a laugh with friends or focusing on the
task.
Excitement-Seeking: You enjoy being a part of the action and conceptual stages of teamwork and direction setting. You may
need to try hard to maintain your enthusiasm through later stages of the project and when tasks feel mundane, casual, or low
risk.
Friendliness: You enjoy being around others and make friends easily, which allows you to be comfortable when working in a
group and sharing your opinions. Keep an eye out for distractions by friendships so you can stay on task and deliver on your
commitments.
Gregariousness: You can work alone or in a group, and can likely to succeed in either situation. Remember that others may
not be as flexible, be prepared to help your teammates adapt to environments that are less preferable to them.

Anxiety: You are unlikely to become worried or stressed about achieving the team's objectives or completing your tasks.
Although you may react well to many situations, try to take a proactive approach and think through different possibilities and
outcomes to become better prepared.
Frustration: You do not easily lose your temper and are able to avoid most team conflict. Capitalize on your ability to stay
calm, but be careful not to appear unengaged or indifferent by avoiding all disagreements. Instead, focus on engaging in
task-focused discussions and debate.
Immoderation: You tend to be able to stay on task, but also are ready to join in spontaneous team discussion to help
generate ideas and solutions. Capitalize on your ability to stay focused to help the team succeed, but do not be afraid to join in
on spontaneous or tangent conversations that can lead to innovation.
Melancholic: You generally feel happy and content with yourself and your abilities. Use your upbeat attitude to help create a
positive team environment and build optimism in others. Respect their feelings and be sensitive to their natural dispositions.
Self-Consciousness: You tend to feel comfortable and confident interacting with your team, which allows you to be unafraid
of people critically analyzing your ideas. Be sure to step aside and gives others the opportunity to share their opinions, and
encourage more self-conscious teammates help build their confidence.
Vulnerability: You tend to be confident managing the pressure of multiple tasks but can sometimes feel overwhelmed. Keep
open lines of communication with your team when you are feeling stressed and need help on a task. When you are managing
your stress well, offer up help to others that may be struggling.

Achievement-Striving: You tend to do what is expected of you and put in extra time when it suits you. Be mindful of team
members who are not putting in as much effort and those that are putting in more than they should. Set clear guidelines of the
amount and quality of work of each team member so everyone contributes equally.
Cautiousness: You are reasonably cautious and consider both sides of a decision before taking action. Help your team take
calculated risks while also ensuring adequate time is given to discuss decisions where the risks could outweigh the benefits.
Dependability: You do not take issue with breaking a few rules or failing to meet some obligations. Be mindful that team
members are counting on you to attend meetings and complete your tasks on time. Breaking promises can lead others to see
you as unreliable or untrustworthy.
Orderliness: You tend to work in a fairly tidy space but you are not distracted or bothered if a mess starts to build up. Be open
to team members who may prefer a different style of work, whether that is clean and tidy or in disarray and chaos.
Self-Efficacy: You tend to be fairly confident in your abilities. Look to others to see how they complete tasks successfully in
order to improve on your own skills and remind yourself of things you have accomplished in order to continue to build your
confidence and excel in your tasks.

Altruism: You seem to find a balance between attending to your own needs and emotions, and considering the opinions and
feelings of others. Maintain your ability to stay focused on your own responsibilities while being mindful and prepared to step
in to assist other team members if needed.
Cooperation: You do not actively seek out confrontation but you also do not shy away from it. Promote harmony and healthy
debate in your team by encouraging less cooperative individuals to stay on task with their arguments and highly cooperative
individuals to stand up for their opinions or constructively analyze others ideas.
Modesty: You have a healthy amount of self-respect and are reasonably proud of your accomplishments. Use your confidence
to help encourage individuals in your team who may not think highly about their value to the team.
Morality: You tend to be genuine and follow the rules most of the time. When working in a team, remember that you are
working towards a shared goal and try not to take advantage of others, as it will negatively affect everyone in the team.
Sympathy: You can sympathize with many people but not all. Working in a team, you will come across unique backgrounds
and situations so be mindful of other members' situations or circumstances that you might not normally be sympathetic to.

Adventurousness: You tend to seek out new and creative ways to accomplish a task. Exploit this trait by helping to
brainstorm innovative approaches to a problem. Keep in mind that extensive exploration can be distracting in tight timelines
where the team may need to use already established methods.
Artistic Interests: You tend to engage in the practical aspects of a task while still holding value in the aesthetic of the work.
Help your team to create a presentation-ready final product that is both technically sound and creative in order to achieve the
highest possible performance.
Imagination: You tend to think in concrete or tangible terms, which means you don't easily get lost in thought. Capitalize on
this ability to concentrate on your work, encouraging other team members to do the same, but take mental breaks that include
non-structured thinking to help generate new ideas and solve challenging problems.
Intellect: You do not mind engaging in theoretical discussions or debating abstract ideas but are also content to focus on the
basic aspects of a task required for your team to succeed. Encourage your team to work on challenging problems while still
accomplishing simple but important deliverables.
Liberalism: You tend to be open to liberal ideologies, but do see the value in tradition and established ways of thinking. Use
this flexibility to connect to different-minded individuals and help others to be open to contrasting perspectives.