Geothermal Energy: A Sustainable Future
By: David Chui
 
Table Of Contents
Title	1
Introduction	3
Discussion
	Part I	4
	Part II	6
	Part III	7
	Part IV	11
Conclusion	13
Contact	14
Works Cited	15
 
Introduction
	For as long as there was civilization, we have managed to harness and use energy. Well before we have discovered fossil fuels such as coal, kerosene, and gasoline, we’ve used wood to provide heat and animals to provide mechanical labor. As demand for energy increased, we have satisfied that need with primarily fossil fuels. They are quite abundant, relatively cheap, and efficient. While fossil fuels have powered us through the industrial revolution and much of modern history, they are not without their flaws. Of course, that is their environmental impact. Burning fossil fuels releases greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming. Scientists have already concluded that we are on our way to an irrecoverable path towards climate change, which will increase global temperatures, raise sea levels and increase the frequency of severe weather events. This will consequently lead to droughts, loss of farmland, a global food crisis, destruction of coastal cities at or below the current sea level, and an increase in heat-related health hazards.  Fortunately, we can minimize these effects if we start moving towards a more eco-friendly energy grid. On earth Day 2016 (April 22), about 120 countries are expected to sign a global initiative to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases at the Paris Agreement. This paper is to recommend development and investment in Geothermal Energy, for I believe it holds much potential in achieving a sustainable future. We will begin by defining the current state of geothermal energy. Then we will examine the drawbacks and limitations of geothermal energy. Next we will compare geothermal energy to other clean sources of energy economically and practically. Finally, we will discuss current R&D and the future of Geothermal Energy. 
Discussion
	Geothermal Energy is energy in the form of heat produced by the earth. While it may seem like there is a quantifiable, limited amount of thermal energy below the ground, the amount is so massive that it is virtually inexhaustible. Geothermal energy is widely recognized as a clean, renewable source of energy. Many countries have had a long history of using geothermal energy, such as Rome and Feudal Japan’s public baths. There are countless other uses of geothermal energy documented throughout the world in nearly every continent, such as heating water, air, greenhouses, cooking, etc. The earlier examples of geothermal energy were all harnessed at surface hotspots, or geysers, for direct usage of the thermal energy. It was only in the last century that we have used geothermal energy for electricity generation. The first power plant appearing in 1904 and the first well drilled in 1921 at what is now Hot Springs National Park. (NREL)
Modern geothermal energy plants are essentially two deep wells drilled in the earth with a closed water loop and a turbine. The process begins when water is pumped deep underground where the geothermal heat superheats the water. Then the water can boil into steam, expand, rise to the surface, and drives a turbine. The steam is condensed into warm water and pumped back down to prolong the life of the heat source. This is called a Dry Steam power plant. Alternatively, Flash Stream power plants increase efficiency by keeping the superheated water in a liquid form in a pressurized well. This forces the water to expand forcefully, or “flash boil”, when pumped back up to the surface and depressurized, the steam is then forced through a turbine to generate electricity. (UCS)
The newest type of plant, the Binary Cycle power plant, uses a system of two closed loops where water is not driving a turbine. The heat is exchanged from the water with a working fluid in a turbine loop through a heat exchanger. The working fluid never directly contacts the water, but has a lower boiling temperature and therefore is more easily converted to steam. The steam from the working fluid drives a turbine and is then condensed and pumped back into the heat exchanger. The more modern Binary Cycle power plants allow for colder working temperatures and increased efficiency. They can be built in places where dry steam plants can’t, and they allow for shallower wells. (UCS)
 (UCS)

	Critics of geothermal energy point out some valid flaws of the system. Perhaps the most obvious and significant limitation is the availability of geothermal energy. Currently, we can only develop geothermal power plants in areas with a shallow geothermal gradient or areas with geological hot spots, usually near continental faults and volcanoes. Because of the high cost of installation, companies tend to only invest in areas where they are certain have a shallow geothermal gradient, so expansion of the energy source is slow. Geothermal power plants also can run out of steam if poorly maintained. Although there is virtually unlimited heat under the earth, a plant can cause regional cooling of its immediate reservoir if steam isn’t recycled or too much water is injected too quickly. Operation of geothermal power plants tends to be more complex and require more workers and technicians than many other sources of renewable energy; many employees often have to be relocated on site. (NREL)
There are also some environmental risks for geothermal drilling. Some critics claim that geothermal energy causes earthquakes, but that is a hotly debated issue that is anything but definitive with strong arguments from both sides. Risk of earthquakes will certainly be minimized in the future with more thorough studies and better understanding of how geothermal wells affect tectonic activity. Additionally, geothermal drilling may release noxious gases that were trapped deep underground, which is why it is important for plants to have gas capturing systems and not vent the toxic gases to the atmosphere. (Sullivan) 
When people think “renewable energy”, most wouldn’t think of geothermal
energy. They would list sources such as “solar”, “wind”, “damns”, even “nuclear” before acknowledging the immense power of the earth’s core –even though nuclear is not renewable. Let’s compare and contrast them to geothermal energy. Wind energy is perhaps the most prohibitive, especially with weather patters being harder to predict as an effect of climate change. China is known to have lost billions of projected income due to poor investments in wind farms. When the wind blows, it is an efficient and cheap way of generating electricity, but still not as cheap as a geothermal plant. In fact, geothermal plants are the most economically efficient source of clean energy, competing only with natural gas power plants for the title of cheapest energy per kilowatt-hour. (Rhyne)
Solar energy is reliable because the sun rises reliably everyday, and it’s practical because anyone can install solar cells on their roofs easily. However, most regions over the 40-degree latitude line (north and south) do not benefit as much from solar energy because of the shorter days and weather conditions in winter months. Solar energy is also generally fairly expensive per MWh because of the cost of production and maintenance of solar cells. Solar cells are also not very efficient, with the latest and greatest technology struggling to push over 25 percent. While there is much potential for improvement, the current state of solar cells is not financially attractive compared to geothermal energy. Another type of solar generator is the massive superheated steam generator, where fields of computer-controlled mirrors precisely reflect the sun towards a central boiler. The water in the boiler is superheated and the steam in turn drives a steam turbine generator similar to the ones found in geothermal power plants. These generators are efficient, but require vast areas of land to be effective, and the mirrors need to very clean which is difficult to maintain in the dusty, arid climates they are well suited for. Geothermal energy’s minuscule footprint is a huge advantage, especially near large cities where land is a valuable resource. (Rhyne)
Hydroelectricity is reliable and efficient. Currently, most hydroelectricity comes from large damns. Being such massive structures, they make for great displays of national fortitude and ingenuity. However, damns greatly disrupt the natural ecology and biosphere of their environments. They disrupt the flow of water and fish migration routes and drown vast areas of natural woodlands underwater. If poorly engineered, they could also pose a vast threat to the security of people who live downstream from a reservoir. As opposed to the relatively small footprint of a geothermal power plant, damns are more environmentally disruptive and cause a greater threat to nearby residents. An alternative to damns is the kinetic wave energy generator. These types of structures are constructed along choppy coasts, offshore on large fixed piers grounded on the seabed, or they may be free-floating. They use massive floaters to surf the motion of the waves. These floaters in turn drive pistons, which output that potential energy to electricity generators. While these structures pose no threat to the environment or cities, they suffer from the same unpredictability problem as wind farms. Sometimes, the sea is calm for extended periods of time, and other times it is too stormy to deploy the floaters without damaging them. (OEC)
Finally, proponents of nuclear energy believe in a future where safer, efficient nuclear power plants provide much of the world’s energy. While nuclear fission energy is reliable, powerful, and relatively “green”, it generates dangerous nuclear waste materials that must be carefully stored for thousands of years. Modern nuclear power plants may have improved on their safety record compared to early developments, but the threats of radioactive exposure and leaks are very real, especially if the plant is built in a geologically active area. Why take the risk when there are other safer options? Geothermal energy does have a slight risk of releasing dangerous gases into the atmosphere, but with good engineering practice and careful emergency management, the risks are much smaller than nuclear fission by many magnitudes. A theoretical alternative to fission is nuclear fusion, which scientists all around the globe from every modernized country are trying to crack. It involves superheating suspended plasma with lasers until the energy fuses light elements into heavier elements in a self-sustaining exothermic reaction. There have been marginal progress in this field, and it sounds like a promising technology. Unfortunately, it is still in relatively early stages of research and development; scientists have not yet made a single self-sustaining stable fusion reaction. Until the day comes that scientists and engineers unlock the secrets of nuclear fusion, we must rely on other renewable energy sources to sustain global energy demand. (WNA)

(EIA) (LCOE = Levelized Cost of Electricity)
Geothermal energy certainly has a lot of potential, and its limitations today may be overcome by future improvements. The US Energy Information Administration predicts the cost of the newest geothermal plants will be less than 0.05 dollars per kWh, which beats even natural gas power plants (along with all other sources of energy). With such economical incentives, much research and development has to be made to increase the development of geothermal energy and expand its geographical feasibility. At the cutting edge of innovation, there are two developing technologies: Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS) and low temperature co-production in oil and gas wells. (Rhyne)
Enhanced Geothermal Systems attempts to expand the locations feasible for production of geothermal energy. It is a process similar to hydraulic fracturing for the extraction of natural gas. Currently, geothermal power plants can only be built in areas where the water can naturally flow through the heat reservoir. By fracturing the reservoir rock before pumping water through it for steam production, engineers will increase porosity of the rock and allow for water flow where it was previously impossible. This can expand geothermal energy production to areas previously thought impossible for geothermal energy development. These new plants will likely all be Binary Cycle plants to preserve the heat of the reservoir and increase efficiency. The only downsides are some of the same drawbacks of hydraulic fracturing for natural gas extraction: seismic activity, worries about groundwater pollution, and deeper, expensive wells. (Younger)
Low temperature geothermal energy is harnessed when the geothermal fluid is at most 300 degrees Fahrenheit. At these temperatures, it isn’t possible to directly drive a turbine generator with steam extraction. However, it may be possible to use a Binary Cycle power plant with a very low boiling point working fluid to harness low temperature geothermal energy. Coincidentally, many oil and gas wells already constructed may be viable for low temperature geothermal energy development with suitably high temperatures and pressures. Each of those wells produce as a waste product thousands of barrels of hot water each year from their operation, geothermal energy production may be an efficient solution for this wastewater that otherwise has to be disposed. Additionally, research shows that production of geothermal energy may enhance the rate at which oil and gas is recovered by increasing pressure in the reservoir. (Younger)
The federal government is fortunately noticing the potential of geothermal energy, with the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 granting four hundred million dollars of funding to the research and development of geothermal energy. Germany, France, Australia and Japan also have invested much into research and development programs to make geothermal energy more economically feasible and widely implemented. MIT estimates that with future developments in EGS and low temperature production, geothermal energy may provide ten percent of the US electricity demand by 2050. (USDE)
	 
Conclusion
	As global demand for energy rises, we must satisfy that need with responsibly sourced energy. Fossil fuels have sustained our growth for the last few hundred years, but we must end our dependence on them. Global warming is one of the greatest threats to a prosperous and sustainable future. It’s too late to stop it, but we can certainly try to minimize its effects. The solution won’t be entirely reliant on any one source of renewable energy, but a combination of all of them. In the sunny climates of the tropics and equator, solar power has much potential. Along the choppy coasts lining ocean jetstreams, hydroelectricity will be very suitable. Even wind energy certainly has its place in the right geographical location. Nuclear fusion might one day be the ultimate source of clear, limitless energy. Until that day comes, I propose we invest more in geothermal energy research and application. Geothermal energy does not rely on weather, time of day, tides, or anything else that typically limit other renewable sources. Furthermore, it requires a comparatively minuscule footprint and can be built where previous oil wells have been drilled. It may be limited today by the geographical area where it can be implemented, but that can be solved with developing technologies. Congress recognizes the potential of geothermal energy and has allotted almost half a billion dollars for research in the field. Nevertheless, this source of green, limitless energy is definitely not widely known like the other renewables. I believe that with more public support, funding and incentives for geothermal energy development will increase. There needs to be more education for geothermal energy so that hopefully, one day, we will be pumping more steam than oil from our Earth.
